Thank you very much. 	
Let me start with my mother. 
My mother is a person without letters, dropped out of high school. I came into the world; [she] went back and finished high school. My mother is a person very much interested in education, tremendous thirst for knowledge, and a very broad visionary human being who, in many ways, lived out her dreams of education through her children, as did my father. 
My mother's shaping: she gave me a sense of who I was as a human being. I remember an incident where I had been challenged and the name calling was, "you dirty black African." The short version of it is, she could have reinforced my anger, because I struck back at this person with anger. And my mother's point was that if calling you "dirty" was important enough to rise up, than that should have been the only justification, not because you're black or not because he called you African, because you're both. You have many, many things. There are many adjectives that describe who you are as a human being, and two of them are that you are black and of African descent. And wherever you go for the rest of your life, you should be able to stand very tall and very proud as a human being and, when asked, when challenged as a black and an African, "Yes I am, and I'm very proud of it." So at that point my mother reinforced my humanity, my sense of myself, my own sense of pride, and her desire to see me fully educated. 
My father, a person with a photographic memory, loved to debate, loved to challenge, loved to challenge the order of things. When I talked to him about what I learned in school he would say, "Never accept at face value. Always be willing to question. Be open to ideas. Search. Probe. Don't just be a robot." And so both of them together, I think, very much interested in the pursuit of educational excellence and on the other hand very proud people, race-conscious people, who allowed me to develop a sense of myself as a proud human being. They told me early on in my life that being black and being African was a good thing, so I was not burdened by that. I've never seen myself as a victim. I saw myself as fighting people who attempted to challenge me as a victim. So they gave me a very strong sense of myself and, at the center of it, education and learning and evolving are very important factors. 
Well, you know it was fascinating, because many of my friends internalized the same notions about my parents that I did. So whenever many of my friends were about to go off into adventures, sometimes on the edge, they would send me home. "Go home, man!" They would call me Sundown Ronny because my friends knew that my parents, when sundown came, I had to be home, I had to be there for meals, I had to be there to do my homework. And so in one sense, many of my friends saw me as a special person, living with a special group of people who wanted very much to see me pursue my education and I think, in many ways, were very protective of me. You know, "You're one of the guys who are going to make it out of here." And that was significant in reinforcing who I was. 
I was born in 1935. West Oakland, early on, was a definite community. There were many white ethnics who lived in West Oakland as a working-class community. When World War II began, West Oakland became the major point of entry for black people coming in from the South, who came in to take advantage of the economic expansion and opportunities of the war economy, as it were. 
As a result of that, suddenly West Oakland over night becomes a small Southern town. And here's this kid who was going to St. Patrick's Catholic School, who spoke a little differently, who talked about different things, and many of these older persons from the South, who had very little if any education, were fascinated by this young guy. "Where did you learn these things?" Or sometimes I would go to visit my friends and we'd go to leave and the old folks would say, "No, sit a while, because I want to hear what this kid has to say." Then I would hear people say, you know, "That kid sure can talk! He's going to be a preacher or a lawyer some day." Well, as a kid those are reinforcing, and very positive reinforcements, and I think that had some significant import in shaping my life. I certainly wasn't a perfect guy. I dropped the ball many times along the way. 
C. L. Dellums, as you know, joined with A. Philip Randolph. These were guys that came out of the twenties, these were the old left-wing guys in the twenties. They came together and organized the first African American trade union in the history of America, the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters. These were guys who placed a great premium on the spoken word as a way of organizing, to be impressive when they challenged people. You know, people thought A. Philip Randolph and C. L. Dellums and these guys were Harvard graduates, because they developed an affect that challenged the system to deal with them intellectually, at an eyeball-to-eyeball level. 
Well, my uncle: here's this beautiful, erudite, incredibly well-groomed, impeccable person with extraordinary articulation who, on Seventh Street, had an office over the pool hall. So in my life with this magnificent success model, and wherever I went, people, when they'd hear my last name would say, "Is C. L. Dellums your father?" And I'd say "No, my father is Verney Dellums, but C. L. Dellums is my uncle." But I immediately began to realize that C. L. was the man and that he commanded respect across the broad spectrum of people in the Bay Area. And going to his office, he had a staff person, he had an office, he smoked a pipe, he dressed elegantly. He was a fighter, he was strong, he was courageous. So this success model in my life was very important in shaping my life, because here I knew that you could succeed, that you could be successful. You did not have to be intimidated, and that you could be respected by people, because the politics of that community came through him: union activity, civil rights activity, et cetera. He was just this incredible, 

larger-than-life person who continued to push me to pursue my education. 
Yes. Sometimes it was overstatement; sometimes I didn't understand. But I knew that I wouldn't understand if I didn't listen. 
So I did learn how to listen. I was around adults a great deal and that became important, the ability to hear the other person, to listen to people, to try to fully understand what the other person is trying to say. Both my mother and my father and my grandmother instilled that in me. Listen to hear. And when they realized that I was listening and that, at some point, I could engage them seriously they said, this guy is understanding. So that again was a positive reinforcement. 
There was one book that stood out. You know I've read a lot of books along the way because, as I said, part of my upbringing, when kids would go out for the summer, I couldn't go out to play until I had read a certain amount of books all the time, so that was a constant reinforcement, the reading and the use of the library. But as a young adult having actually come out of the university, I had a master's degree, and I met this wonderful, wonderful African American who was the first Ph.D. that I met to know that he was a Ph.D. He handed me a book one day and he said, "I want you to read this book." And the title of the book was The Shoes of the Fisherman. Very briefly, it's a story about a Catholic cardinal imprisoned in the Soviet Union, freed, goes back to the Vatican by a strange set of circumstances. He becomes the Pope, and it's the story of how this guy escapes the Vatican to go out and touch people and continue to feel life in a real way. And he said, "When you finish the book, come talk with me." [Later:] "Why do you think I gave you this book?" I had no real idea. He said, "Because it's a story about the loneliness of leadership and the need to continue to fight isolation as a leader. I see you as a young leader, and you need to prepare yourself for leadership." Overwhelming! Made me go back and read the book a second time with different eyes and a different view.
Political Education
Martin Luther King had assumed an incredible role. He had mounted the podium at Riverside Church in New York and made a historic speech. He stood up and opposed America's involvement in Vietnam and had the audacity, the courage, and the vision to raise his voice in the name of peace. He came to the University of California at Berkeley because after that speech he was criticized from whites and blacks, blacks thinking he had detracted from the Civil Rights Movement, many whites thinking, you know, the audacity of this man to challenge American foreign policy. It's un-American! Well he came to the University of California to speak to his critics. There were twenty-five or thirty thousand people who came to Sproul Hall. I was just a young guy near the back of the crowd, but with so much pride that tears came to my eyes just to see this extraordinary person command twenty-five thousand people with his eloquence, with his courage, and with his vision. 
He made many, many statements, and whenever he spoke I used to get a notebook and write them down. One of the statements he made there was that there are two kinds of leaders, one who waits until the consensus is formed and then runs swiftly in front of the consensus to be the leader. And the second is the one who has the audacity to go out and mold and shape the consensus. And he said, I am from the latter. And that impressed me very much. The second point that he made, that just made sense out of all the movements to me, was that peace is more than simply the absence of war, it is the presence of justice. And those two comments together were significant in shaping the philosophical basis of my politics and the way I had to approach the politics of my life. 
I just thought that that was his magnificence, his eloquence. First of all, he understood the sophistication of coalition politics and the need to move beyond it. 
That point -- peace is more than the absence of war, it's the presence of justice -- it meant that everybody's movement, that every effort to challenge injustice was a significant effort, and that if you brought people together challenging injustice, that that could allow you to develop the kind of broad-based power that could bend the political will toward justice and toward your objective. 
Assuming the responsibility for the knowledge you have once you see injustice, once you understand pain, you cannot walk away from that responsibility. Once you see the harm that's being done, you no longer can have the excuse of ignorance. And once you know, it seems to me that you then have to assume the responsibility of that knowledge. I believe that the overarching responsibility of a leader and a person in political leadership is to be part of the educative process, to bring people along with you. The demagogues don't change the world, it's educators who are willing to contribute to the discourse, to attempt to inspire a broader range of people to participate and to be involved. And when he said that the other kind of leader is the leader that's willing to go out to shape the consensus, what he was saying is you have to be willing to risk. You've got to be willing to walk out there. You can't play it safe, you can't wait until the consensus is formed and say, hey folks I'm leading. To be a leader means to be willing to take the risks of controversy. 
I would go even further, that in those moments of controversy, when you take those kinds of risks to step out there to articulate an unpopular idea or an unpopular cause, if you help people understand why it's there, sometimes the hot light of controversy is focused upon you, and my view is that in those rare moments, when the hot light of attention is focused upon you in those moments of controversy, those are the moments when large numbers of people tend to focus, because they focus on controversy. Those are the moments when you have to step forward and be part of the educative process, take the risk. You can't be afraid of controversy, you have to figure out how to use controversy in a positive way to advance the ideas that you're talking about, to further educate human beings, to further respect the fact that if people are confronted with information, then at the end of the day more often than not, people will arrive at the appropriate place. But you've got to get people on the same page with a shared sense of knowledge. If you and I don't share a base of knowledge it's very difficult for us to find places that we can come together. 
